Automate release process (#7601)
istio/istio.io: README.md

## istio.io

> This repository contains the source code for the [istio.io](https://istio.io) and

Reviewer: remove `the` before istio.io.

## Versions and releases

Istio maintains two variations of its public site.

- [istio.io](https://istio.io) is the main site, showing documentation for the current release of the product.

> [istio.io/archive](https://istio.io/archive) contains snapshots of the documentation for previous releases of the product. This is useful for customers still using these older releases.

Reviewer: A few lines down (not exactly sure how to select it), it has `All three sites`. This should say `Both sites`?

## Versions and releases

> Istio maintains two variations of its public site.

Reviewer 2: Why two? There are 3 bullets here.

Author: There are only two now: istio.io and preliminary.istio.io. The archive.istio.io won't be used for archive any more and instead we'd use istio.io/archive.

Reviewer 2: ah ok, thanks

- The content of istio.io is taken from the latest release-XXX branch. The specific branch that
is used is determined by the istio.io [Netlify](https://netlify.com) project's configuration.

### Publishing content immediately

Checking in updates to the master branch will automatically update preliminary.istio.io, and will only be reflected on
istio.io the next time a release is created, which can be several weeks in the future. If you'd like some changes to be
immediately reflected on istio.io, you need to check your changes both to the master branch and to the

> current release branch (named release-XXX such as release-1.7).

Reviewer 2: Are releases always just named with 2 digits? If so maybe this should read `named release-<MAJOR>.<MINOR>`?

Author: ```suggestion
current release branch (named `release-<MAJOR>.<MINOR>` such as `release-1.7`).
```
I believe so. Yeah, this should look clearer.

This process can be taken care of automatically by our infrastructure. If you submit a PR

> to the master branch and annotate the PR with the `actions/merge-to-release-branch` label,
> then as soon as your PR is merged into master, it will be merged into the current release branch.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to the master branch and annotate the PR with the `cherrypick/release-<MAJOR>.<MINOR>` label,
then as soon as your PR is merged into master, it will be merged into the specified release branch.
```

### Creating a major/minor release

Here are the steps necessary to create a new documentation version. Let's assume the current
version of Istio is 1.6 and you wish to introduce 1.7 which has been under development.

#### When Istio source code is branched

> Run `make prepare-1.7.0`, and that's it. This will grab the latest material from the new istio source branch.

Reviewer 3: This sounds pretty mysterious. You should say what "latest material" it is grabbing and where's it's putting it. Isn't it it just updating the istio/istio.io master branch to use the release branch of istio/istio for doc testing? Or is there more? Either way, you should say exactly what "preparing" entails.

#### On the day of the release

1. Run `make release-1.7.0`. This make target will change some variables in `master` and `release-1.6` as needed, and create a new branch `release-1.7` for the new version.

>     - For a dry run before official release, run `make release-1.7.0-dry-run`, which will only create a new branch `release-1.7-dry-run`, and not touch any other branches.

Reviewer 3: This seems out of place in the "#### On the day of the release" section, since a dry run would likely be done a day or so ahead of the release day.

    - Select the option to trigger an immediate rebuild and redeployment.

    - Once deployment is done, browse istio.io and make sure everything looks good.

1. **[NEEDS REVISION]** Go to the [Google Custom Search Engine](https://cse.google.com) and do the following:

    - Download the archive.istio.io CSE context file from the Advanced tab.

    - Add a new FacetItem at the top of the file containing the previous release's version number. In
    this case, this would be "V1.6".

    - Upload the updated CSE context file to the site.

    - In the Setup section, add a new site that covers the previous release's archive directory. In this
    case, the site URL would be archive.istio.io/v1.6/*. Set the label of this site to the name of the
    facet item created above (V1.6 in this case).

### Creating a patch release

A few days before the patch release, the release managers should notify the Doc WG that the release
is built and is starting it's long running qualification test. At this time, move the doc automation
tests to use the new release to verify automated doc testing passes. 

To create a new patch release, you need to

> 1. Run `make release-A.X.Y`, where `A.X.Y` is the name of the release. If it is a private security patch, run `PRIVATE_PATCH=true make release-A.X.Y`, which will prevent the branch from grabbing the latest docs.

Reviewer: grabbing the latest docs and updating the istio reference for testing.

We probably still want a step to do that after the private release is ready and made public. So maybe we want to add some words around running again without the PRIVATE_PACTH=true when the release is made. Actually, since we have everything inside the PRIVATE_PATCH (we removed the templating), maybe we can change the code to remove PRIVATE_PATCH and just have the instructions say to run it when a public build qualification is started (as directed by the release managers) or after a private release is made.

Author: Not sure if I've understood it clearly... if PRIVATE_PATCH is removed then "after a private release is made," go mod and go tidy will still be run, which sounds like opposite of a previous [comment](https://github.com/istio/istio.io/pull/7601#discussion_r445184673).

Reviewer: My thought was that we were left with only two basic items in this flow, the go.* update and the reference document update after removing the templates. I looked again today and there is actually a third part of the update, the data/args.yml update.

In your testing, do you know if we can update the args.yml before we add the files in the news directory and have a PR pass its tests (I know there is an issue if you add the files without updating the args.yml)? I suspect the answer is that we can't, and we need to keep the news files and args.yml change within the same PR.

If we have to merge the args.yml change with the news, then I think we can remove that piece from automation and just let the release managers worry about that. This leaves us with the two pieces: go.* and reference docs. It then makes sense to remove the PRIVATE_PATCH check and simply have the target run ~3 days before the release if it's built publicly or after the release is publish if built privately.

If we can merge the args.yml change early without breaking things, then that could help with cherrypicking the news files. @frankbu Feedback from you as well, but should the release managers create the release notes in _master_ and then cherrypick to the _release_ branch and update the args.yml in that PR, or should they make the change in the _release_ branch and then manually cherrypick the changes back to _master_ without the args.yml change? In the past, the former seemed to be common, but recently, the later has been more common (I think because that limit the bottleneck for PR merging to one release of istio.io on publishing day and less likely to need a force merge).

Reviewer: Comment from @brian-avery on ordering: `The process we decided on in the PSC is release first and then master given that we need to make sure it works in the release branch and not block on that, and we can get master merged after that.`

Author: Per my test it seems that args.yml *can* be merged early without breaking things (#7634). So I guess we can run this as it is now. After the release note is completed in the release branch, both changes can then be cherry-picked to master.

Reviewer: The problem I noted with merging early in your other PR is that it updates the latest version shown on the bottom of the page (which isn't released yet). So we shouldn't be updating that until the release is being published (at the same time as the release/security notes).

So I think we have a go.* update along with the reference doc update that runs ~3 days before the release for public releases (when asked by the person heading up the release), or after the release is published and public repos updated in the case of a private release.  In the case of the private built release we could ask the release them to do the run the automated job and then let that get cherrypicked on publish day. Actually, it might just be best to have the release team run and submit the PR to the public/private repo as needed for the updates.

There is another piece of work which is the doc updates at publish time (args.yml and notes). That just comes from the release side. First to the `release` branch and then manual cherrypick of the notes to `master`.

Author: Sounds good. I made changes to patch_release.sh and updated [README](https://github.com/istio/istio.io/pull/7601/files#diff-04c6e90faac2675aa89e2176d2eec7d8R104). Does this look good to you?

### Creating a version

Here are the steps necessary to create a new documentation version. Let's assume the current

> version of Istio is 1.6 and you wish to introduce 1.7 which has been under development.

Reviewer 2: Does `creating a version` imply major/minor or does it also include patch releases?

#### When Istio source code is branched

Run `make prepare-1.7.0`, and that's it. This will grab the latest material from the new istio source branch.

#### On the day of the release

> 1. Run `make release-1.7.0`. This make target will change some variables in `master` and `release-1.6` as needed, and create a new branch `release-1.7` for the new version.

Reviewer 2: I believe that this is specifically for major/minor releases, correct? If so, we need to make that more clear.

Author: Correct. Let's change that.

    - Select the option to trigger an immediate rebuild and redeployment.

    - Once deployment is done, browse istio.io and make sure everything looks good.

1. **[NEEDS REVISION]** Go to the [Google Custom Search Engine](https://cse.google.com) and do the following:

    - Download the archive.istio.io CSE context file from the Advanced tab.

    - Add a new FacetItem at the top of the file containing the previous release's version number. In
    this case, this would be "V1.6".

    - Upload the updated CSE context file to the site.

    - In the Setup section, add a new site that covers the previous release's archive directory. In this
    case, the site URL would be archive.istio.io/v1.6/*. Set the label of this site to the name of the
    facet item created above (V1.6 in this case).

### Creating a patch release

A few days before the patch release, the release managers should notify the Doc WG that the release
is built and is starting it's long running qualification test. At this time, move the doc automation
tests to use the new release to verify automated doc testing passes. 

> To create a new patch release, you need to

Reviewer 2: How much of the above process applies to patch releases as well? None?  Either way, I think we should reorganize the content to be something like:

```
Creating a Major/Minor release
...
Creating a Patch release
...
```

WDYT?

Author: Sounds good. I'll change it right away.

#### When Istio source code is branched

> Run `make prepare-1.4.0`, and that's it. This will grab the latest material from the new istio source branch.

Reviewer: Your usage examples use 1.7.x. I think the example of going from 1.3 to 1.4 is old. I might renumber them so it's going from 1.6.x to1.7.x to be a little more current.

Author: Sounds good!
